“Before, I used to fill up in La Jonquera. Now, I go a little further south because it’s even cheaper.” André, 67, lives in Rivesaltes, near Perpignan. For several years now, he’s been crossing the border to do his shopping and fill up his car in this town, which has become a vast open-air shopping center for French consumers. “I buy pastis, household products, and meat. And above all, I fill up my tank.”
On Sunday afternoon, after consulting a price comparison app, the retiree ventured even further, to a “Petrem” station in Pont de Molins, 18 kilometers from the border, to fill up his olive-green Duster. “It’s even cheaper than in La Jonquera: diesel is €1.63! Back home in Rivesaltes, it’s around €2.15. On a full tank, I save about €25.”
At this low-cost, self-service gas station, the majority of customers are French. They come from the Pyrénées-Orientales, Aude, and Hérault departments, and sometimes even further afield.
Like André, they take advantage of the attractive prices offered by the nearly 250 stations in the province of Girona alone, compared to just 71 in the Pyrénées-Orientales.
In just a few weeks, French customers at gas stations in the border region have increased by 22%. On weekends, the trend is even more pronounced, with long lines at La Jonquera, and also further south in Figueres, about 30 kilometers from the border.
While gasoline has always been cheaper in Spain, the gap has widened since the start of the American airstrikes in Iran. Thanks to a public deficit reduced to 2.2% of GDP, its lowest level since 2008, the Spanish government has been able to lower fuel taxes. As a result, a liter of unleaded 95 costs between €1.35 and €1.50 depending on the station, which is 30 to 50 cents less than in France. For diesel, prices range from €1.60 to €1.80.
"They're great in Spain and they help their people!" explains Valérie, originally from Béziers, whom we met at "La Tramuntana," one of the 18 stations in La Jonquera. "We wonder what our government is waiting for to help the French."
